# AdMerge
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) Biomarker Collection Package.

With sharp increases in AD cases, deaths, and costs stressing the health care system and caregivers, several major AD data sources exist which allow researchers to conduct their research. For example, the BIOCARD study is a longitudinal, observational study initiated in 1995, and designed to identify biomarkers associated with progression from cognitively normal to mild cognitive impairment or dementia; the ADNI study is a multicenter observation study launched in 2004, to collect clinical, imaging, genetic and biospecimen biomarkers from cohorts of different clinical states at baseline; the NACC UDS data is a collection of data reflecting the total enrollment since 2005 across 34 AD Centers and includes subjects with a range of cognitive status. 

The ADMerge Package provides a function, ad_merge(), that merges data from various AD data sources to create a analysis dataset.This package establishes AD data standards and data dictionaries that define the formats and organization structures of the AD data across multiple data sources. R functions are provided for data analysts to integrate data from multiple data sources and create their analysis datasets. 

# Installation

Use the following codes to install the CSTWAS package
```R
library(devtools)
install_github("Thewhey-Brian/ADMerge")
library(ad_merge)
```
For details about how to install a R package directly from GitHub: https://rdrr.io/cran/remotes/man/install_github.html.

# Usage

## Prerequisites
In order to collect biomarkers for AD, locally access to all biomarker files is needed. 

To help understand the significant amount of data in ADNI dataset, we provided [ADNI_Tools](https://github.com/Thewhey-Brian/ADNI_Tools) to provide/generate a reference files dictionary. So one can access the detailed information for all files without downloading them. 

## Overview Data Structure
Before merging all biomarkers across different files, it is crucial to review the files structure through function `get_src_table()`. 

```R
src_table = get_src_table(path_to_biomarker_files)
```

The data structure table `src_table` will be one of the inputs for the main merging function.

**Inputs:**
- `path`: The path to the directory containing the data files.
- `FILE_pattern`: A regular expression pattern that specifies the file types to include in the source table. The default is ".xlsx|.xls|.csv".
- `ID_pattern`: A regular expression pattern that specifies the potential ID variables in the data files. The default is "ID".
- `DATE_pattern`: A regular expression pattern that specifies the potential DATE variables in the data files. The default is "DATE|VISITNO".
- `IS_overlap_list`: A list of logical values that specifies, when merging, whether overlapping between time windows is allowed (TRUE) or not (FALSE). The length of the list must be equal to the number of files being read. The default is NULL.
- `WINDOW_list`: A list of numeric time windows for matching the DATE variables. The length of the list must be equal to the number of files being read. Default is NULL.
- `ID_usr_list`: A list of user-specified ID variable names. If provided, the function will try to match the variable names to the potential ID variables in the data files. The default is NULL.
- `DATE_usr_list`: A list of user-specified DATE variable names. If provided, the function will try to match the variable names to the potential DATE variables in the data files. The default is NULL.
- `file`: A path to a file where the source table will be saved as a CSV file.

**Outputs:**
A table with the following structure:
  |      file      |          VARS_in_file         |    ID_in_file   |         DATE_in_file           | ID_for_merge | DATE_fro_merge | IS_overlap | WINDOW |
  | -------------- | :---------------------------  | :-------------- | :----------------------------- | ------------ | -------------- | ---------- | ------ | 
  | CSF_file       |  Phase; ID; RID; SITEID; ...  | ID; RID; SITEID | USERDATE; USERDATE2; EXAMDATE; |      ID      |    EXAMDATE    |   FALSE    |   366   |
  | IMAGE_file     |  Phase; ID; RID; SITEID; ...  | ID; RID; SITEID | USERDATE; USERDATE2; SCANDATE; |      ID      |    SCANDATE    |   FALSE    |   366   |
  | DIAGNOSIS_file |  Phase; ID; RID; SITEID; ...  | ID; RID; SITEID | USERDATE; USERDATE2;           |      ID      |    USERDATE    |   FALSE    |   366   |

## Modify `src_table`
There are two ways to modify `src_table` generated by `get_src_table()`.
1. Run `get_src_table()` again with any specified `ID_usr_list`, `DATE_usr_list`, `IS_overlap_list`, `WINDOW_list`. Note: The length of the list must be equal to the number of files in `src_table`.
2. Run `get_src_table()` again with `file` specified. This will save `src_table` as a csv file to the local directory. One can edit this csv file locally and input to the merging function later. 

## Merging
The merging action is performed by function `ad_merge()`.

**Inputs:**
- `path`: The path to the directory containing the data files.
- `DATE_type`: The type of DATE used in the data, either "Date" (e.g. 2017-1-16) or "Number" (e.g. 3 or m48 ...).
- `dict_src`: A dataframe containing structual information of the input data files. Default NULL. Fill in if `src_table` is modified and stored in R environment.
- `dict_src_path`: The path to the `src_table`. Default NULL. Fill in if `src_table` is modified locally with its csv file. 
- `timeline_file`: The name of the file containing the timeline for the data. Could be any value in the **file** column of `src_table`.
- `timeline_path`: The path to the timeline file. Default NULL. This is an alternative option for inputing `timeline_file`.

**Outputs:**
- `analysis_data`: The merged dataset with all the relevant biomarker information.
- `dict_src`: The `src_table` used for this merging. 






